AutoArm movement/control audit — 2026-10-01

Reviewers: root and GPT-6.1 Sol agent control_history_audit (read-only).
Scope: v2.5, v2.8.1, v3.0, v3.1, v3.2, v4.0, v4.0.2 and v4.0.3.
Trigger: severe reported shaking during manual movement in v4.0.2; v2.5
remembered as smooth. Supplied configuration has 18 body stages, all weights
1/1, standard speeds/accelerations/PI settings, and both damping gains 0.2.
The initial audit was read-only. The subsequent v4.0.4 repairs are listed below.

PROVEN CONTROL CHANGE

v4.0.1 introduced measured-velocity damping, defaulting to 0.2. The feedback
law subtracts filtered velocity while manual input is active or pose error is
outside the relevant deadband. Integral compensation remains retained inside
the deadband. These policies conflict at input release: the integral can learn
to cancel damping during sustained movement, then the damping term switches
off while that integral bias remains. The requested velocity need not become
zero when the pilot releases control.

The angular idle band is 3 degrees, versus 0.075 degrees while turning. This
leaves substantial space for the retained bias to cause unwanted movement.
This is a confirmed release/hold regression. It does not, by itself, establish
the cause of severe multi-joint shaking while input remains held.

FULL C# CONTROLLER REPRODUCTION

The optional ControlAudit probe compiles the complete script in the existing
simulated PB host. It uses ideal velocity actuators without SE flex/contact,
30 seconds of steady input followed by 30 seconds of release, and matched
configuration applied with Reload then On (v2.5 On alone does not reload).

Rotary case: isolated achievable roll axis, requested 1 degree/s, existing
3 degree/s native cap and 6 degree/s^2 acceleration cap.

Version/setting       Release I     Release request   Peak travel after release
v2.5                  0 deg/s       0 deg/s           0.074992 degrees
Current, damping 0    0 deg/s       0 deg/s           0.074992 degrees
Current, damping 0.2  0.200205 deg/s 0.200205 deg/s    3.214587 degrees

Linear case: isolated piston, requested 0.05 m/s, existing 0.2 m/s native cap
and 0.4 m/s^2 acceleration cap.

Version/setting       Release I     Release request   Peak travel after release
v2.5                  0 m/s         0 m/s             0.002722 m
Current, damping 0    0 m/s         0 m/s             0.002722 m
Current, damping 0.2  0.009999 m/s   0.009999 m/s      0.010805 m

The agent's independent scalar reproduction agrees with the angular result.
The tiny scalar/full-controller difference is consistent with matrix damping.
The earlier DampingCases tests used delayed pistons and short input pulses;
they did not cover long angular motion followed by release inside the idle
deadband. Their passing results were insufficient evidence for making the
new gains the default on a long real arm.

HISTORY COMPARISON

v2.5 through v4.0 retain equivalent manual P/I gains, deadbands, integral
retention and antiwindup, pilot target advancement, task weights, bounded
solver equations, speed caps and acceleration bounds. Constant inlining and
helper extraction are not gain changes. Rotary signs remain axis*(-dir),
piston signs axis*dir, and the rotary linear column Cross(ang, head-origin).

The v3.0 PB split adds transport, equipment supervision and arm-owned paths.
It does not change the ordinary manual controller equations. ControlElapsed
accumulation, timed-only solving, capped integration dt and uncapped velocity
observation dt already exist in v2.5. Additional callbacks/instruction work
may affect real cadence/budget; actual game telemetry is needed to assess it.

v2.8 changes the general endpoint abstraction from Head position/matrix to
EndPosition/EndPose, supporting a bare rotor-part frame. A healthy mounted
tool still uses its named marker, so this path can match v2.5. The actual
endpoint, orientation and joint list should be compared in-game, particularly
the tool coupler beyond the supplied 18 body stages. The coupling layout was
reversed in v2.6 (base on tool, top on arm); the graph-direction sign handles
the reverse edge, but different physical geometry/reference is not ruled out.

No legitimate continuous second velocity writer was found in ToolSwap.
ToolSwap StopMotion sends acknowledged STOP messages. Routine manual PING and
control do not call Arm-side ZeroMount. An old script running in another PB
could still fight the controller; the user has not confirmed its absence.

Schema replacement can lose older preferences. The v4 internal projection
omits Actuators and can clear cached tool weights; Host.Layout restores body
weights. The supplied body table is all 1/1, so this does not explain changed
body allocation, but the actual tool-coupler/downstream weights need checking.

IN-GAME EVIDENCE AND REMAINING QUESTION

1. The user tested PositionDamping=0 and OrientationDamping=0, then On:
   NO IMPROVEMENT. The proven damping regression does not explain the observed
   severe shaking on this arm by itself.
2. No tool is attached. Info reports 18 groups, one converged solver pass,
   no budget shortage, roughly 0.14m position error and saturated 0.2m/s
   linear feedback at zero pilot demand. Angular error is inside the 3 degree
   idle band. This is a snapshot, not a physical-motion trace.
3. Verify that no old arm controller still runs on these actuators.
4. If shaking persists, collect per-tick elapsed/control time, pilot demand,
   feedback, filtered velocity, integral, applied damping gates, signed joint
   commands, actual joint motion, endpoint/frame and solver convergence/budget.
   A static Echo screenshot or total assertion count cannot establish these.

Matched v2.5/current command comparison over 1,800 frames with 15 native
actuators and damping zero gives maximum output difference zero. Geometry is
held fixed in that comparison; this does not simulate a flexible SE arm.
The next isolated game check reduced PositionCorrectionCap to 0.05m/s while
keeping pilot HeadSpeed=0.2 and other gains unchanged. User reports reduced
manual shaking, but no improvement while Tool 2 parks the current tool.
Automatic motion uses separate caps; its strict pose feedback remains distinct.

Do not retune several gains without distinguishing geometry, allocation,
physical flex/contact and cadence problems. A future damping law
must handle retained load bias and deadband transitions coherently, with
angular, long-input/release and coupled-arm regression coverage.

VERIFIED V4.0.4 REPAIRS

Bare manual aim used native rotor Forward (a tangent), although the socket
points along -native Up. That caused Left to point down and Forward/Right to
rotate azimuth without aiming the socket. Manual facing, HEAD translation,
Q/E, Roll steps and explicit orientation commands now convert at the input
boundary. Observation, Jacobian and native docking frames are unchanged.

The detached-angle guard originated before the PB split and checked every
profile with an unwrapped phase difference. Detached Angle is retained in the
installed SDK; it is not generally undefined. The check now applies only to
the non-axial incoming tool while its full-phase approach is cached. It uses
wrapped differences and captures the destination phase with its target.
Inactive/source angles and expected attachment phases do not invalidate it.

The insertion lookahead previously jumped between Move/Kp and zero as angular
error crossed the tolerance: 33.3mm at .05m/s. It now blends continuously from
full advance at the tolerance to zero at twice the tolerance. Automatic pose
feedback uses half-tolerance precision bands instead of chasing zero error;
its velocity integral retains load compensation. Linear lookahead includes
the position band, avoiding a minimum-speed stall. Completion and rotor
attachment proofs retain their tighter thresholds.

Installed SDK merge capture allows approximately 5.732 degrees opposing-normal
error and 4.585 degrees tangent error. Its center-distance check is GridSize
plus .17m, not unrestricted Cartesian position error. Parking defaults are now
.01m/1 degree; rotor insertion remains capped at .003m/.2 degree. Explicit
Custom Data overrides remain authoritative.

Native physics-change machinery can reattach a stator by Detach then TryAttach.
Lock formerly canceled immediately on a missing source attachment. After
verified merge support it now waits stopped for at most two seconds, accepting
only absent observations or the known top/owner. Wrong identities and support
loss remain fatal. Detach requires correct source attachment and locked support
on consecutive timed observations. Attach likewise precedes support release.

The optional damping settings remain, but new defaults are zero to restore the
older release behavior. Explicit user values are not rewritten. This does not
claim to fix the user's broader shaking; live feedback/physics remains open.

Compilation, packing IL equivalence and 193,526 simulated assertions pass.
These tests cover all manual socket directions, native-frame preservation,
continuous alignment demand, relevant/axial/wrapped phase checks, merge grid-ID
change, temporary/permanent source loss and hostile top/owner/support changes.
Static precision bands, retained bias and actual .001m/s line completion are
covered. The agent caught the initial slow-lookahead/deadband interaction;
the final implementation includes the band offset and a physical-progress test.

REPRODUCTION TOOL

From the repository, run:
dotnet run --project tools/ArmTests -- <complete single-instance script> --control-audit

The current raw engine is generated at tools/ScriptPack/obj/AutoArm.Engine.txt
by tools/Build-AutoArm.ps1. The historical complete v2.5 script can be read from
git show v2.5:AutoArm_Source.txt and saved to an ignored scratch file. Use the
existing DOTNET_CLI_HOME and SE_BIN conventions from the build scripts.
